The cohabitation between Atomic Design and Bootstrap (#144)
ippontech/blog-usa: posts/atomic-design-bootstrap.md

---
authors:
- Anthony Rey
tags:
- Atomic Design
- Front-End
- Bootstrap
date: 2020-01-16T15:09:00.000Z
title: "The cohabitation between Atomic Design and Bootstrap"
image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gnuk/blog-usa/atomic-bootstrap/images/2020/01/atomic-design-bootstrap.png
---

My previous [blog post](https://blog.ippon.tech/atomic-design-in-practice/) was about Atomic Design in practice. I used this organisational method for several years in many teams and different projects.

> At the same time, often, colleagues are promoting [Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com) (or equivalent) usage to make easier the graphical interfaces integration on the web. In addition, a large number of tools and frameworks integrate it natively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the same time, often, colleagues are promoting [Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com) (or equivalent) usage to make the graphical interfaces integration easier on the web. In addition, a large number of tools and frameworks integrate it natively.
```

However, it is difficult to use Bootstrap in an Atomic Design approach. We quickly lose the consistency of our application in favor of Bootstrap's graphical identity.

> I want to share with you my experience of _Bootstrap_ so that you know how to make it cohabit with your own styles rather than fighting against it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I want to share with you my experience with _Bootstrap_ so that you know how to make it coexist with your own styles rather than fighting against it.
```

> I want to share with you my experience of _Bootstrap_ so that you know how to make it cohabit with your own styles rather than fighting against it.

Author: I think I don't apply this change, maybe you have another idea ?

# But, what is Bootstrap ?

> What is Bootstrap ?

> This question may seem trivial at first sight, but it is not!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This question may seem trivial at first, but it is not!
```

> From the official website, it is a framework for building [responsive](https://alistapart.com/article/responsive-web-design), [mobile-first](https://www.lukew.com/ff/entry.asp?933) web applications. From their remarks, it's the world's most popular front-end component library on the web and it's based on:

Reviewer 2: If you agree with them, you could remove this sentence because we think you disagree  and you don't take position

* HTML structure
* CSS style file (also Sass sources)
* JavaScript for component behaviour (display a modal, alert messages, …) with libraries like jQuery.

> To help us, _Bootstrap_ give us a grid system to organise components using columns that will be adapted to the screen size (we will talk about it later in the blog post) and a lot of components ready to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To help us, _Bootstrap_ gives us a grid system to organize components using columns that will be adapted to the screen size (we will talk about it later in the blog post) and a lot of components are ready to use.
```

Author: I used organise on my previous article, I know it's used in the UK, so, do you think I should use organize or organise for all this blog post?

> In summary, on one hand, _Bootstrap_ proposes a Pattern Library. This is an organised representation of reusable components using code snippets, design guidelines and use cases. On the other hand, it is a set of mechanic components (Alerts, Toggle, Carousel, Collapse, Modal …) made with [JavaScript, jQuery and Popper](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/getting-started/introduction/#js)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, on one hand, _Bootstrap_ proposes a Pattern Library. This is an organised representation of reusable components using code snippets, design guidelines and use cases. On the other hand, it is a set of mechanic components (Alerts, Toggle, Carousel, Collapse, Modal …) are made with [JavaScript, jQuery and Popper](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/getting-started/introduction/#js)
```

![Descriptive schema about a Pattern Library](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gnuk/blog-usa/atomic-bootstrap/images/2020/01/atomic-design-bootstrap-pattern-library.png)
_Pattern Library_

The rest of this blog post will focus on the `Pattern Library` aspect.

# Use the strength of Bootstrap

> As reminder, _Atomic Design_ allows you to create and assemble graphical components by granularity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a reminder, _Atomic Design_ allows you to create and assemble graphical components by granularity.
```

The _atoms_ combine to form _molecules_, which themselves assemble into _organisms_ to form templates which constitute the models of our pages.

The global idea is to define a graphic design. _Bootstrap_ being an existing Pattern Library, there may be a risk of conflict between the _Bootstrap_ choices and ours.

Nevertheless, using this type of framework brings advantages (reusable components, graphic coherence, numerous contributors ...); it may be difficult to remove it.

> That's why I'm going to show you several examples to show you how to make _Atomic Design_ and _Bootstrap_ coexist.

Reviewer 2: 'show you' is used twice

# Try to not use Bootstrap components

> First of all, I recommend you to avoid the use of _Bootstrap_ [Components](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/components). Why? Because they are graphic elements with a strong impact on what the application is doing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First of all, I recommend that you avoid the use of _Bootstrap_ [Components](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/components). Why? Because they are graphic elements with a strong impact on what the application is doing.
```

> As an example with [buttons](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/components/buttons). They have some variants depending on their states (hover, focus, disabled…) and it gets more complicated when assembling them with other buttons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Buttons](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/components/buttons) are an example. They have some variants depending on their states (hover, focus, disabled…) and it gets more complicated when assembling them with other buttons.
```

> As an example with [buttons](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/components/buttons). They have some variants depending on their states (hover, focus, disabled…) and it gets more complicated by assembling with other buttons.

Reviewer 3: and it gets more complicated when assembling them with other buttons*

![Bootstrap button with states: normal, hover, focus, disabled](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gnuk/blog-usa/atomic-bootstrap/images/2020/01/atomic-design-bootstrap-buttons.png)

> _Buttons states from Bootstrap website_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Button states from the Bootstrap website_
```

> That's why, if you choose to use _Bootstrap_, you will impact the brand image but also the mechanic of your application. Therefore, it is better to make your own buttons with your own semantic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's why, if you choose to use _Bootstrap_, you will impact the brand image but also the mechanics of your application. Therefore, it is better to make your own buttons with your own semantics.
```

> Yes, but they are already ready, why not reuse them? Especially since many people maintain them?

> This is the argument I hear systematically when we talk about this kind of tools "it exists", "why reinvent the wheel?". I will try to answer these remarks beginning with two quotes from __Alla Kholmatova__ book, [Design Systems](http://designsystemsbook.com):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the argument I hear systematically when we talk about this kind of tool: "it exists", "why reinvent the wheel?". I will try to answer these remarks beginning with two quotes from __Alla Kholmatova__ book, [Design Systems](http://designsystemsbook.com):
```

> __Functional Patterns__ are tangible building blocks of the interface. Their purpose is to enable or encourage certain user behaviors.

_page 63_

> Example of __perceptual patterns__ […] include tone of voice, typography, color palette, layouts, illustrations and iconography styles, shapes and textures, spacing, imagery, interactions or animations, and all the specific ways in which those elements are combined and used in an interface.

_page 82_

Thus, for our buttons, it is necessary to reflect before choosing a ready to use component:

* Why do you need a blue button with rounded corners? all states? all sizes? 9 semantic variants proposed?
* Do you need glued buttons when grouped?

> * How many time need you to change colors? add new variants? remove rounded corners? shadows?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* How many times do you need to change colors? add new variants? remove rounded corners? shadows?
```

* What will happen if you need to upgrade Bootstrap? Even if it is a minor release?

> You can follow this type of remarks to other [Components](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/components/buttons) to understand it is not relevant to use them when you need a graphical identity ; because you may take a lot of time to override and maintain them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can follow these types of remarks about other [Components](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/components/buttons) to understand it is not relevant to use them when you need a graphical identity ; because you may take a lot of time to override and maintain them.
```

> You can follow this type of remarks to other [Components](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/components/buttons) to understand it is not relevant to use them when you need a graphical identity ; because you may take a lot of time to override and maintain them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can follow this type of remarks to other [Components](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/components/buttons) to understand it is irrelevant to use them when you need a graphical identity ; because you may take a lot of time to override and maintain them.
```

Author: I don't agree with this one, I think it's not because it's not relevant that this it is really irrelevant.

> Even if I think it's not the Atomic Design principles, some use cases don't need a lot of energy in an important graphical identity. Sometimes the Bootstrap behaviour may be adapted. In this case, it is interesting to __use__ `Components` or [edit parameters](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/getting-started/theming/#variable-defaults) without overriding them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even if I think it's not the Atomic Design principles, some use cases don't need an important graphical identity. Sometimes the Bootstrap behaviour may be adapted. In this case, it is interesting to __use__ `Components` or [edit parameters](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/getting-started/theming/#variable-defaults) without overriding them.
```

Author: I want to have the idea there is a "energy cost" notion, it's not about the graphical identity. it's just that there is a graphical identity wanted but there is a solution with a lower cost using Bootstrap. If you have a suggestion don't hesitate to answer :)

# Ok, but, what should I use if I want to use Atomic Design?

> Like I said, you must avoid _Bootstrap_ components usage because they may come into conflict with __Functional Patterns__ and __Perceptual Patterns__  of your design.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like I said, you must avoid _Bootstrap_ components usage because they may come into conflict with __Functional Patterns__ and __Perceptual Patterns__  in your design.
```

> However, _Bootstrap_ has some useful elements with less impacts on __Functional Patterns__ and  __Perceptual Patterns__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, _Bootstrap_ has some useful elements with less impact on __Functional Patterns__ and  __Perceptual Patterns__.
```

Let's start with some examples.

## Grid system

![A Bootstrap grid system disposition](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gnuk/blog-usa/atomic-bootstrap/images/2020/01/atomic-design-bootstrap-grid.png)
_Bootstrap grid system example from the website_

> One of these elements is the [grid system](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/layout/grid), because it allow a grid simulation with 12 columns an manage some responsive design issues. Even if gutters (space between columns: 30px by default) may have a lot of effects on the building of a grid, they can be removed using `.no-gutters` modifier.

Reviewer 3: because it allows a grid simulation with 12 columns and to manage*

using the `no-gutters` modifier.*

> One of these elements is the [grid system](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/layout/grid), because it allow a grid simulation with 12 columns an manage some responsive design issues. Even if gutters (space between columns: 30px by default) may have a lot of effects on the building of a grid, they can be removed using `.no-gutters` modifier.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of these elements is the [grid system](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/layout/grid), because it allows a grid simulation with 12 columns to manage some responsive design issues. Even if gutters (space between columns: 30px by default) may have a lot of effects on the building of a grid, they can be removed using `.no-gutters` modifier.
```

> One of these elements is the [grid system](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/layout/grid), because it allows a grid simulation with 12 columns and to manage some responsive design issues. Even if gutters (space between columns: 30px by default) may have a lot of effects on the building of a grid, they can be removed using the `no-gutters` modifier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of these elements is the [grid system](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/layout/grid), because it allows a grid simulation with 12 columns and manages some responsive design issues. Even if gutters (space between columns: 30px by default) may have a lot of effects on the building of a grid, they can be removed using the `no-gutters` modifier.
```

> Related to `Components`, the gris has a less impact on a perceptive and functional value. It is used to structure elements inside columns and can be used on the `organism` part to manage `molecules` and `atoms`.

Reviewer 3: the grid has less impact

> Related to `Components`, the gris has a less impact on a perceptive and functional value. It is used to structure elements inside columns and can be used on the `organism` part to manage `molecules` and `atoms`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Related to `Components`, the grid has a less impact on a perceptive and functional value. It is used to structure elements inside columns and can be used on the `organism` part to manage `molecules` and `atoms`.
```

> Related to `Components`, the grid has a less impact on a perceptive and functional value. It is used to structure elements inside columns and can be used on the `organism` part to manage `molecules` and `atoms`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Related to `Components`, the grid has less impact on a perceptive and functional value. It is used to structure elements inside columns and can be used on the `organism` part to manage `molecules` and `atoms`.
```

## Utilities

> Some elements are use as utilities, they usually have a lower graphical value than `Components` and are used by composition..

Reviewer 3: Some elements are used*

As an example, we will use [text](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/utilities/text).

> This utility let you do generics actions like:

Reviewer 3: This utility lets you

> This utility lets you do generics actions like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This utility lets you do generic actions like:
```

* alignment
* prevent line return and truncate
* transform to lowercase, uppercase …
* change weight and use italic
* change font style to monospace

> Some rules are more generic than others: where alignment is common and will have a small effect on style, the specific font choice for something like monospace may have more impacts:

Reviewer 3: may have a greater impact:

```css
.text-monospace {
    font-family: SFMono-Regular,Menlo,Monaco,Consolas,"Liberation Mono","Courier New",monospace;
}
```

> May be you can think it is not an important effect, but, depending on the utilities, this type of effect may vary, this is the point of [colors](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/utilities/colors) which has its own semantic and refers to _Bootstrap_ branding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Perhaps, you are thinking that it is not an important effect, but, depending on the utilities, this type of effect may vary, this is the point of [colors](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/utilities/colors) which has its own semantic and refers to _Bootstrap_ branding.
```

You must be pragmatic to choose utilities.

# Go further with Sass

> Extends and customize _Bootstrap_ can be done using  [Sass (SCSS)](https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap) [sources](https://sass-lang.com). It is possible to change container size depending on window size, colors, and there is many other exposed variables using `!default` Sass principle. Moreover, file fragmentation let you use parts of _Bootstrap_ like use only the grid system for example by importing the Sass file you want to use.

Reviewer 3: Extending and customising*

and there are many other*

file fragmentation lets*

like using only the grid system

> Extends and customize _Bootstrap_ can be done using  [Sass (SCSS)](https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap) [sources](https://sass-lang.com). It is possible to change container size depending on window size, colors, and there is many other exposed variables using `!default` Sass principle. Moreover, file fragmentation let you use parts of _Bootstrap_ like use only the grid system for example by importing the Sass file you want to use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Extend and customize _Bootstrap_ can be done using  [Sass (SCSS)](https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap) [sources](https://sass-lang.com). It is possible to change container size depending on window size, colors, and there is many other exposed variables using `!default` Sass principle. Moreover, file fragmentation allows you to use parts of _Bootstrap_ like using only the grid system : for example by importing the Sass file you want to use.
```

In this case, you can use them for:

> * `Components` : Change colors for perception

Reviewer 3: Changing colors for perception

> * `grid system` : Change columns number to fit what you need

Reviewer 3: Changing columns number to fit what you need

> More information on what is available to extends _Bootstrap_ are on the [Theming Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.4/getting-started/theming) page.

Reviewer 3: is available to extend*

> I recommend you to not override too many properties of _Bootstrap_ because your coupling can impact your maintainability and version upgrades.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I recommend not overriding too many properties of _Bootstrap_ because your coupling can impact your maintainability and version upgrades.
```

# Conclusion

> There is a lot of way to use _Bootstrap_ in an _Atomic Design_ project. With the experience and depending on the context, we learn how to not override, not use build-in _Bootstrap_ components without think about how they will be used and how they are perceived. Sometimes it is not needed to add the framework because it may not add value.

Reviewer 3: There is a lot of ways*

we learn how not to override, not to use built-in _Bootsrap_ components without thinking about how they will be used and how they are perceived.*

Sometimes it is not needed to add to the framework*

Reviewer 3: I just re-read this, maybe I missunderstood ! 

If you meant "we learn how not to override, nor use built-in _Bootsrap_ components...." do take my review into account. (Except you have to revert **to** and **not**)

> There are a lot of ways to use _Bootstrap_ in an _Atomic Design_ project. With the experience and depending on the context, we learn how not to override, not to use built-in __Bootstrap__ components without thinking about how they will be used and how they are perceived. Sometimes it is not needed to add to the framework because it may not add value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a lot of ways to use _Bootstrap_ in an _Atomic Design_ project. With the experience and depending on the context, we learn how not to override and not to use built-in __Bootstrap__ components without thinking about how they will be used and how they are perceived. Sometimes it is not necessary to add to the framework because it may not add value.
```

> Personally, I prefer develop new components by myself to add the best graphical value I can to the application.

Reviewer 3: I prefer to develop/I prefer developing*

> Personally, I prefer developing new components by myself to add the best graphical value I can to the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Personally, I prefer developing new components myself to add the best graphical value I can to the application.
```

> In another way, be pragmatic let structure components into atoms, molecules and organisms based on granularity and the way to assemble them. My usage of _Bootstrap_ today, when I am in a project with this kind of framework, is only with some utilities like `d-none` or alignments like `text-right`. I also use the `grid-system` but as a source of inspiration because most of the time the graphical identity doesn't match what propose _Bootstrap_.

Reviewer 3: be pragmatic,*

>  "be pragmatic, let structure components into atoms [...]" 

Not sure what you mean here, a word (verb?) might be missing here

doesn't match with what _Bootstrap_ offers*

Author: So i changed it to :

```
In another way, be pragmatic helps to structure components into atoms, molecules and organisms based on granularity and the way to assemble them.
```

The global idea is not to stay rigid with three levels of granularity.

> In another way, be pragmatic helps to structure components into atoms, molecules and organisms based on granularity and the way to assemble them. My usage of _Bootstrap_ today, when I am in a project with this kind of framework, is only with some utilities like `d-none` or alignments like `text-right`. I also use the `grid-system` but as a source of inspiration because most of the time the graphical identity doesn't match with what _Bootstrap_ offers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, being pragmatic helps structure components into atoms, molecules and organisms based on granularity and the way to assemble them. My usage of _Bootstrap_ today, when I am in a project with this kind of framework, is only with some utilities like `d-none` or alignments like `text-right`. I also use the `grid-system` but as a source of inspiration because most of the time the graphical identity doesn't match with what _Bootstrap_ offers.
```

> When we must use this (as an example: in an existing application), this blog post may help you to know when you can use the framework and when you can have to create your own styles.

Reviewer 3: and when you should create your own styles.*

> When we must use this (as an example: in an existing application), this blog post may help you to know when you can use the framework and when you should create your own styles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we must use this (as an example: in an existing application), this blog post may help you understand when you can use the framework and when you should create your own styles.
```

> If, like me, you make graphical components, I encourage you to make your own components without any framework before trying to cohabit with an existing solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If, like me, you make graphical components, I encourage you to make your own components without any framework before trying to coexist with an existing solution.
```
